In this section you will learn about
procurement reporting activities.
This will include inappropriate
procurement practices,
complaint mechanisms and reporting requirements.
This section should take you approximately
20 minutes to complete.
Before jumping into reporting activities,
let’s look at some of the inappropriate
procurement practices managers should avoid
if they are to remain respectful to the various laws,
regulations and policies that apply to procurement.
These practices include: contracting without a
written contract or verbal authorization;
contracting without proper authority;
retroactive or after-the-fact contracting
or backdating a contract;
contract splitting;
payrolling;
inappropriate sole-sourcing;
employer-employee relationships;
inappropriate use of emergency contracting;
inappropriate statements of work
or evaluation criteria.
The following exercise will help
you determine what not to do.
For definitions, see the What Not To Do
job aid in the tool box.
So, you have seen what you can and cannot do
in terms of your decisions and actions
in the procurement process,
but what if you don’t abide by these rules?
What are the repercussions?
There are different levels of authorities
that provide oversight of federal public
service procurement to ensure
the rules are being followed.
Authorities can be internal
or external to organizations.
For example, many departments may have ethics
advisers or compliance and oversight branches,
and interdepartmental governance committees.
These authorities may provide support
to resolve issues internally
before formal escalation is required.
Authorities with oversight responsibilities for
procurement in the federal public service include:
the Office of the Procurement Ombudsman,
the Canadian International Trade Tribunal,
the Federal Court,
Internal Audit in departments or delivered centrally
through the Office of the Comptroller General,
the Auditor General,
and Standing Review Committees.
Their roles differ depending on the nature
and monetary amount of the procurement.
Curious to know more about these organizations?
Why not consult the Oversight
job aid in the tool box?
Did you know that departments, agencies,
and other organizations are responsible
for making available various reports
on contracting activities
for the general public or for use within government?
That’s why record keeping is so important and why
the data reported on contracts must be accurate.
Here is a list of reports for which
you may have to provide input.
Proactive Disclosure of Contracts
Contracts with Former Public Servants
Comprehensive Land Claims Agreements
Procurement Strategy for Aboriginal Business
Treasury Board Directive on Government Contracts,
Including Real Property Lease,
in the Nunavut Settlement Area
Ownership of Intellectual Property
Auditor General Reports
Internal Audit Reports
Access to Information and Privacy
But contract information is not only used in reports.
It is also used for proactive disclosure,
which is posted on the Open Government Portal
as required to meet legal, policy,
corporate, and parliamentary needs.
For example, your contract awards and amendments
are made available to the public,
due to the proactive disclosure of contracts,
when their value is more than $10,000.
They are published on the Open Government Portal,
thus making government and public service officials
accountable to Canadians.
This reporting is normally done by the procurement
specialist or contracting officer.
Though it may not be your responsibility, it is
important that you are aware of these requirements.
But don’t worry, you won’t be doing this reporting
or proactive disclosure alone!
Usually, you will work with your administrative staff
or your organization’s procurement team
to prepare the information needed.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
Take time out from the course to see
which complaint mechanisms
are used by your organization as well as
which reports will need to be supported.
So now that you know more
about inappropriate procurement practices,
complaint mechanisms and reporting,
let’s see what you remember
by taking this short quiz.